Hello, everybody. Welcome to a new episode of the
Decent. I'm your host, Ricardo Lob. And today I'm
joined by Doctor Emily Qureshi Hurst. She's a Stinar
lecturer in Philosophy at Oriel College and a junior
research fellowship at Pen Brook College, University of Oxford.
And today we're talking about her book, God Salvation
and The Problem of Spacetime. So, Doctor Qureshi Hurst,
welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to everyone.
Thank you so much for inviting me. I'm really
looking forward to having a conversation with you about
this.
So I, I mean, this is a very interesting
book and actually, to be honest, it's not that
common for me to get into topics in theology
on the show. So I, I mean, just to
perhaps introduce the audience to the main questions we
are exploring here today. First of all, what is
the metaphysics of time and what kinds of questions
does it tackle?
So that's a really great question to start with
because in a sense, all of the conversations we're
gonna be having about philosophy, about theology and about
spacetime are structured in accordance with some of the
conceptual categories that we get from the metaphysics of
time. So metaphysics very broadly is the study of
ultimate reality. So maybe the study of being the
study of change identity, that sort of thing. Uh
And the metaphysics of time then asks what time
is uh does time exist? Does it flow? Do
all moments of time exist eternally? Or is the
future unreal the present real and the past gone
forever? So it's those kind of questions that are
asked, does time pass? Does time exist? What are
moments of time? Um And how best should we
try and come towards an answer to these questions
as well?
So in the book, uh and since you come
at this, mainly through a philosophical perspective, but you
also have a bit of theology to it. And
then you also go through some of the science.
And later in our conversation, we're going to talk
about the relationship there between these three domains of
knowledge, let's say, but you also go a little
bit through the history of how philosophers have fought
about time. So when it comes to the ancient
philosophers, what were the main ideas they have about
time? Exactly
of time or the metaphysics of time is really
fascinating because it's in a sense unique in that
we've been asking very, very similar questions about time
for thousands of years and we still haven't really
come across any answers that everybody agrees on. So
um it there are some really durable key concerns
there um there were of course different ways of
tackling these questions across time. But we see embryonic
forms of the debates and the metaphysics of time
today in the classical discussions. So one of the
distinctions that is sometimes drawn is between the view
of Heraclius and the view of Parmenides. So Heraclius,
uh well, we only have fragments of his texts,
but pe people via reconstruction have come to the
conclusion that Heraclius thought that everything was ultimately in
flux. And so the only thing that we can
be certain of is change itself, he famously said,
uh you never step in the same river twice.
So uh everything is in flux and in motion
and these are early iterations of the kind of
ideas we see in the so called a theory
of time that says time objectively passes um in
the metaphysics of time today. Whereas Parmenides seemed to
believe that there was only one enduring universal substance
and that any change or motion was ultimately ultimately
an illusion. And so in that sense, uh we
must, must think of time itself as static and
unchanging as well. And that echoes the more contemporary
theories of time known as the block universe or
eternal or B or the B theory or C
theory. And so even as far back as thousands
of years ago, we're thinking about the nature of
time and whether time does pass or doesn't pass,
and there's not been much more agreement since then
between scholars about that?
Mhm. Uh So some of those more modern theories
of time that you're mentioning there, I mean, occur
both in theoretical physics and also I guess the
philosophy of physics, right. Yeah. Mhm. And how about
medieval philosophy? What were some of the more dominant
ideas during that period?
Yeah. So I'm not a medievalist, it's not my
area of specialism. So I, I do touch upon
some of these in the book. Um But it's
very much a snapshot view. It's a really rich
and interesting and complex uh historical period. And um
so I can only speak to the kind of
snapshots that I provide in the book, but it
was a deeply religious time. And so lots of
the questions about time and temporality were considered in
relation to God and to theology. So some of
the key questions were that God experience time, is
God inside time subject to the passage of time
himself? Or is God outside of time and views
all moments of time, like we would be looking
on to a painting. So he sees everything at
once. Um And if that's the case, then what
are the implications for the creature or human beings
relation to time? Um So, yeah, tho those sorts
of questions about God and God's relation to time,
I think really dominated the period.
Uh You mentioned there very briefly that uh the
medieval period was one where people were really religious
and I mean, theology interrelated very much with philosophy.
So was it really during this period or was
it earlier that questions surrounding the nature of time
interrelate with uh theological questions?
So we can see the connection between God and
time going back almost as far as theology does?
Because if you think about it, it in a
sense underlies lots of the other key theological questions.
So if we think of creation or the universe
as fundamentally temporal as structured in accordance with time,
then understanding how God relates to time is um
is a prerequisite for understanding how God relates relates
to creation at all. And so I think theological
writers uh throughout the generations have been aware of
this fact and therefore have seen time as something
that is a really important theological resource.
So now, I in more recent times in the
20th and the 21st century, uh and we're focusing
here mostly on philosophy of course, but you can
also talk about theoretical physics. What are the most
dominant ideas about time? Of course, earlier you mentioned
in passing some of the main, some of the
most dominant theories, but please give us a little
bit more detail. I mean, what are the main
ways people think about time nowadays?
So in a sense, we can think of pretty
much the entirety of the philosophy of time since
the 20th century as being written in the long
shadow of a paper written by Jeremy McTaggart in
1908, McTaggart was concerned with um demonstrating that time
was in fact unreal. And in order to make
this argument, he distinguished between a few different ways
that we could describe time. So the first he
named the A series um and the A series
describes time um as being fundamentally construed by properties
of objective tense. So past, present and future are
fundamental components of time. Next, he described the B
series which says that time is fundamentally composed of
temporal relations before after and simultaneous with. And the
third was the C series which has received a
lot less attention and this structures time in accordance
with the relations of temporal between us. So um
in a sense, the C series describes time a
bit like a color spectrum and then it makes
sense being read either way um from the, from
the blue side to the red side. Um And
in the same sense, the C series says that
time can be understood just as adequately if you
view it from the beginning of the universe to
the end or the end of the universe from
the beginning. So these have since been rarified into
fully fledged temporal, the theories, not just the and
so the a theory of time, there's a few
different ones, but generally, they'll all share the properties
of all the characteristics of saying that time objectively
passes. So there is generally believed to be an
unreal future, an objectively real present and a past
which some a theories think the past does exist
and some think it doesn't. But what's important is
is there's this objective now, which is the same
across the entire universe. And that now acts as
a kind of frontier of becoming. So things pass
from the unreal future into the real present. And
in doing so they come into existence. So this
kind of temporal theory can accommodate change objective becoming
temporal passage, all of the things that when we
encounter the world we think exists. So uh I
I at the moment it's raining where I live
and I can see raindrops falling down from my
window sill and that seems to show that there's
something dynamic happening there, there is, there is a
moment of time where the water is just about
to drip off my window sill and a moment
where it's falling. Whereas the B and C theory
of time deny that such passage is objective. So
if you're a B theorist, you think the most
important features of time are the temporal ordering relations
of uh before and after. So what matters if
you're giving a fundamental description of time is the
order that events are in and the fact that
this order is structured from beginning to end. And
once you've described the locations in the temporal series
of all of the events you you've described time.
So in terms of what this means metaphysically, we
might think of time as a so called block
universe where moments in time are like points in
space, they all exist even if we can't see
them. So, uh just because I'm not in Egypt
at the moment, it doesn't mean Egypt doesn't exist.
And the B theory says, well, just because I'm
not in 1977 at the moment doesn't mean that
1977 isn't objectively out there somewhere else in the
universe. And the C series is also committed to
the block universe. But instead of saying there's a
as an objective order from past to present, it
just says that there is this block and you
can look at it in any direction as long
as you've got the events in the right order,
it doesn't matter which end of time you start
with. So the metaphysics of time has largely focused
on thinking about what these temporal theories mean, which
ones are correct and support is given to each
of these from different corners. So one of the
fascinating things about time is that you can come
at it from so many different disciplinary perspectives. You
can think about temporal experience. You can come up
with metaphysical arguments, you can come up with arguments
that examine temporal language and the truth claims of
temporal language. You can of course look to physics,
different branches of physics. You sometimes get different answers
about time. When you look at quantum physics, special
relativity and general relativity. And obviously, we hope that
that's not going to be the case, there's clues
and inconsistencies there in science that need to be
worked out. But um yeah, the metaphysics of time
is really, really broad and really fascinating. And by
its very nature, I think interdisciplinary, we need to
take into account experience, physics, language metaphysics when we're
trying to come up with answers about the nature
of time and whether time passes or not.
So I want to ask you now a question
that is more directly related to uh physics, theoretical
physics about spacetime. But just before we get into
that, I would like like to hear your thoughts
on the question of how modern physics relates to
metaphysics because of course, it's one thing for us
to have an understanding of time or an account
of time according to physics. Uh And people could
say, OK, so that's the science of time or
at least the physics of time because of course,
we can also talk about the cognitive science of
time, the psychology of time, which is not exactly
the same thing as the the physics of time
as we know. Uh But uh I mean, people
who work on metaphysics do not necessarily have to
agree that whatever physicists describe is the same as
metaphysics or that should be the metaphysical account of
reality, right? So how do you look at that
relationship?
Yeah, that's a really great question. I personally am
a huge fan of interdisciplinary and interdisciplinary collaboration. And
I really don't think we can come to the
right answers about life's biggest questions if we silo
our academic disciplines and don't talk to each other.
So back in um the early modern period, the
discipline, one of the primary academic disciplines is Natural
philosophy, which involved theology, uh empirical experimentation, metaphysics, geometry,
maths. And we had a much more holistic understanding
of how to approach these big questions. Now you
do sometimes see physicists and metaphysicians not really talking
to each other too much. And I think that's
a problem. I mean, lots, lots of metaphysicians do
engage with physics for, for good reason because we
don't want to be just doing armchair philosophy. We
don't want to just sit and reason and think
well, OK, let's think about how all of these
arguments work without actually looking at the world on
its own terms and seeing what the world says.
So physics without philosophy, I think is lost because
it's just mathematics and data. And when you start
building theories out of those, you're doing philosophy, some
physicists don't want to admit it, but that's what
they're doing. Uh And metaphysics, if you really want
to delve deeply into reality and understand it, you
need to be looking at reality. So not just
from the perspective of an abstract argument but from
the perspective of an empirical science. So I think
they need to have a really close relationship and
that doesn't mean that they need to collapse into
each other. We need the particular skill sets of
each of these disciplines and each of the prac
practitioners of those disciplines in order to do the
most rigorous work. But there should be open communication
between them.
Yes. And of course, I, I mean, the question
I was alluding to here or the, the comment
I was alluding to here, let's say is that
um the metaphysicians are not bound to uh I
mean, the compromise of deriving their metaphysics directly from
uh physics or theoretical physics, right? I mean, that's
a debate to be had. Of course, I know
that some physicists and also some philosophers uh start
from the assumption that whatever the nature of reality
is it is what physics uh says it is,
but that's just an assumption and it can be
discussed, right?
So it can be discussed. So the where I
sit on this question is I think, I think
I am a naturalist, which means I think that
in principle, science is able to explain a lot
of the uh questions about the world. But that
doesn't mean that it has currently got the right
answers. So I think there's a really important distinction
there between saying in principle, we are able to
arrive at answers to these questions via empirical means
and then saying, oh, we have already done that
and there's good reason to think that we probably
haven't got all of the answers yet because our
two fundament physical theories ie general relativity and quantum
mechanics fundamentally disagree. Um And they're not able to
be reconciled at the moment. It's one of the
biggest problems in physics and time features in both
of these. And so we have competing descriptions of
time in a sense and we're, we're waiting for,
for the answers for a general for a theory
of everything or a theory of quantum gravity that
will hopefully advance some of our, maybe advance the
debate. I mean, who who knows? They might open
even more questions than, than it gives answers. But
yeah, I think in principle, we should be able
to reach answers empirically with help for metaphysics, but
it doesn't mean we're already there yet.
And with all of those caveats in mind, what
is space time? I mean, what is the best
understanding of space time we have through physics right
now?
So there are some disagreements about what space time
is of a philosophical nature. So the two ways
of understanding spacetime are known as substantive and relation
is so substantially is the idea that space time
is a substance. It's an entity, it exists, it's
out there in the world. And even if you
took out all of the events, um everything out
of it, all of the objects, all of the
relations, you would still have something, there's a container
there, which is space time within which everything happens.
Whereas the relation is says, well, actually spacetime is
emerging and it's, it emerges out of the relations
between objects and events. So if you take the
objects and events out of the universe, there's nothing
left, there is no substance, ontological substance of spacetime.
Instead, it's just, there's just relations between events. So
the debate rages on between these two, I think
if I had to hedge my bets, I think
I would come down on substantive. But I, I
uh I'm saying that with a big pinch of
salt, I'm not sure.
Right. So I mean, the, the question I'm about
to ask you, you've, you've already alluded to some
aspects of it throughout our conversation. But uh also
for the audience to get a better understanding of
how the questions here are interrelated, like questions in
physics with questions in theology which for people who
are more on the naturalistic end of the spectrum
perhaps would be very hard to understand. Uh HOW
does spacetime relate to theological questions and what theological
questions are we exactly talking about here?
So spacetime as we understand, it is comprised of
four dimensions, three dimensions of space and one dimension
of time. So all of the questions that we
think about relating to God and time must be
considered in conversation with space time, I think um
we also can think about questions about spatial location.
So does God exist at all moments in space?
What happened if the Christian religion is right. What
happened when God entered space time, it through the
incarnation in a way that he wasn't present before
is something like that really possible. Uh So those
are the kind of spatial questions we might answer.
I mean, there's lots more, but those are the
kind of primary ones. And then um with relation
to God and the time dimension. Yeah, it's, it's
largely questions about whether God exists inside time or
outside of time. But we also might want to
think about what the nature of space time means
for human beings and certain theological questions that concern
human beings. So, one of the key doctrines in
Christianity is the doctrine of salvation. And one of
the key things I'm looking at in my book
is, can we understand the Christian doctrine of salvation
classically conceived in the context of spacetime and do
the different interpretations of space time yield different answers
to questions about is salvation possible? What does salvation
look like? Can there be a scatological redemption and
bodily resurrection? So there's a huge number of questions.
I mean, as I said before, the nature of
time, the nature of space are really foundational in
understanding reality and the human beings that live within
it. And those are key theological issues. So you,
you can't, in my opinion, you can't really do
theology without thinking about space time and of course,
space time.
So let's unpack that a little bit and to
do that, let's go through some of the main
questions that you explore in your book actually. So
starting with the nature of God. So uh first
of all, perhaps, let me ask you, what is
the uh I mean, what are questions related to
the nature of God? What is the problem, let's
say of the nature of God, what are we
trying to really get at here?
So the God of classical theism is believed to
have certain properties um and have those properties maximally.
So this is sometimes called perfect being theology. And
some of the properties that are often cited are
omniscient, which is being all knowing, omnipotent being all
powerful, uh omni benevolent being all loving simplicity, meaning
not comprised of any component parts, the attributes being
essential, the properties um uh Yeah, of one's essence
and existence being one and the same. Um So
what we're trying to think about with questions of
God and time is can which interpretations of time
or which understandings of time are compatible with those
properties? So different in different understandings of God's relation
to time, yield different problems or concerns for some
of these properties. And I'm happy to talk through
those in uh in more detail. Yeah. So um
let's think about the idea that God is inside
of time first and then we'll think about God
being outside of time. So if God is inside
of time, then God is subject to the passage
of time, God can only directly experience what is
happening now. Um And so let, let's think about
some of the problems this might raise. If God
is supposed to be all powerful, then this seems
to really, really limit God's ability to access and
experience parts of time that aren't happening now. This
is called the prisoner of time objection. And some
people have been really concerned with this idea that
God by being temporal would be somehow subservient to
time, subject to its passing in a way that
doesn't fit with God being all powerful. There are
some responses to this. So Richard Swinburne, for example,
says that God has chosen to limit his power
in this sense because it's theologically worthwhile for God
to do so. This was an act of choice.
So it's not a limit of God's power. It's
an actualization of God's power in a way that
some that limits some of the things he can
do because there are other benefits that come from
it. Um So another problem with God being inside
of time is that it seems to make God
an object among objects and classically God is thought
of as being transcendent. So being outside of and
above and far more than the created universe. And
so if God is inside of time, then it
seems like God is an object among objects. And
that doesn't seem to fit with the classical conception
of God. So those are a couple of problems.
There are more. But um let's stick with those
for now. But then there are some benefits to
being inside of time. So if you're inside of
time, then you can have an ongoing relationship with
the creatures or the beings within time. So as
a creature or an individual's life unfolds, God can
be present in the unfolding of that lifetime. God
can act in the world in ways that seem
much more easy to understand God can respond to
petitionary prayer. Um And so there are, there are
benefits that people have seen with the God being
inside of time. And what's, what's worth noting here
as well is that lots of contemporary theologians are
now arguing that actually, if you look at the
Bible, that seems to be much more supportive of
God being inside of time, even though the classical
conception of God is that God is outside of
time. And that was the medieval consensus. And the
reason for that is that God is understood to
be perfect. And Plato made this argument that perfect
beings cannot change because any change would be a,
a degradation from perfection. If you're already perfect, then
the only way is down in a sense. So
God needs to be changeless. And if we think
of change in time as being intimately connected, then
God cannot be temporal, a God who's outside of
time is also able to be transcendent, is able
to see everything in time at once. And so
has perfect knowledge of everything that happens. Whereas the
God that's inside of time might only be able
to have direct knowledge of what's happening now and
can't know the future, which seems to be a
limit of knowledge. Um And the, yeah, the God
outside of time, I mean, in a sense, yes,
it was the, it was largely supported in medieval
times. But even now the so called God of
the philosophers, the God that philosophers of religion tend
to talk about seems to be much more conducive
to this idea of God being outside of time.
So, um sorry, that was a really long answer.
But just unpacking some of the implications of the
nature of God and the different temporal models of
the God time relationship.
So uh let me ask you a question sort
of related to that. Uh I mean, this might
sound a bit unsophisticated because again, I don't read
uh lots of uh literature on theology and philosophy
of religion perhaps. But um if uh and please
correct me if this idea is wrong, but if
the idea is that God created the universe, then
I would assume that people would also with that
assumption would come, the assumption that God would stand
outside of the universe that he created, right? So
if that's true, then wouldn't that immediately and necessarily
implicate that he also stands outside of space time.
And so would necessarily be a temporal,
yes, that is one of the arguments that people
make. And I think it's a very powerful one.
If God is fundamentally temporal and time is part
of physical creation, then there must have been at
least some period in God's lifetime where there was
no temporal dimension. And so yeah, that's a very
good argument. And another argument that's quite similar is
according to our understanding of space time, if something
has a spatial location, they have a temporal location.
And if something has a temporal location, it has
a spatial location. But because God is not a
spatial or physical being, God does not exist in
space and therefore God doesn't exist in time either.
So I, I think there's probably more powerful reasons
to think that God is outside of time than
inside of time if God exists. But I come
at it from a philosophical perspective and theologians and
biblical scholars tend to prefer the idea that God
is inside of time because the Bible seems to
talk about God as having a history that unfolds.
Uh AND that has and that God dynamically responds
to the unfolding of world history in a way
that's hard to imagine for a God that's outside
of time. So the debates rage on basically.
So the nature of God is one question, the
second one has to do with human salvation. So
in what ways would the problem of spacetime connect
to the nature and scope of human salvation?
So I think the best understanding of space and
time is one that is consonant with the B
theory of time. And this is the block universe
view. And so according to the block universe, all
moments of space and time exist in a four
dimensional in um yeah, four dimensional Minkowski spacetime basically.
And what that means is every moment of your
life exists. You are in a sense are a
four dimensional worm spread out, spread out in space
time. Even though we experience only slices that space
time in our immediate perception. What this means is
the person I was when I was five, the
person I was when I was 1217, 25 all
of those versions of me exist as well as
all of the versions of me that are 30
35 50 7080. If I live that long, one
of the things that Christianity is committed to is
the idea that we can undergo a process of
transformation ie personal salvation that you can go from
being fallen at one point in your life to
being saved at a later point, or at least
begin to be saved. Even if the ultimate salvation
happens after the end of the universe or the
end of your temporal life. But if all moments
of time exist and all versions of you exist,
then it's difficult to see how you can actually
objectively change from being fallen to being saved. All
you can say is you're fallen there and saved
there. And that seems to be in my view,
in contradiction with what Christianity teaches about the idea
of personal salvation. So I think there are ways
around this, but they're probably not as robust as
the Christian theologian would like. My solution to this
is to say, well, we should probably think of
salvation as something subjective and phenomenological. So it's a
product of our experience, we experience ourselves changing from
fallen to being saved. And for us that constitutes
personal salvation, even though it doesn't mean that we
have objectively changed from fallen to being saved. This
works for me. But there are related problems ie
the idea that sin is eliminated. So Christianity again
teaches that sin will ultimately be eliminated. But if
the block universe is the correct understanding of reality,
then no past sin is eliminated, it's still there
even if we aren't in the same location. So
the problem of disappearing sin or the problem of
the elimination of evil remains on the block universe.
And for that reason, again, some theologians and theists
are inclined to say that a different interpretation of
spacetime is true. One that's more consonant with the
a theory of time. So the idea that there
is an objective now and no future and no
past. And if that's true, this is called present
is, and if present is is true, then it
is possible to eliminate past evil. Because once something
that ceases to be present, it ceases to exist.
And so in that sense, you can undergo an
objective change from being fallen to being saved and
the sin can vanish out of reality. So in
terms of personal salvation, you might be more inclined
to be an atheist rather than a B theorist
and believe in a understanding of space time. That
is not really the kind of understanding that most
physicists would endorse either the block universe understanding of
space time that's supported by Einstein's relativity theories.
A and in a sort of related question, what
do we know from physics about the possible end
of the universe? And if the universe comes to
an end, wherever it might be, what sort of
implications would that have for salvation?
So we're not entirely sure whether the universe will
come to an end or not, but we think
now that it probably will. So there's two end
scenarios uh for the universe, one is freeze, which
is the heat death of the universe, which is
the idea that the universe expands and cools until
and everything decays until it's a sort of soup
of radiation. Um And nothing can live in such
an environment. So that's freeze and fry is the
idea that the universe collapses back in on itself
in um a big crunch. Basically the opposite of
a big bang. So we don't know, this depends
on um the amount of matter in the universe
and the strength of gravity and the value of
the cosmological constant and the expansion of the universe.
So there's lots of parameters that go into it.
But basically, at the moment, the universe is expanding,
we don't know if it's gonna keep expanding forever
or if it's going to like a stretched elastic
band ricochet back and ultimately collapse back in on
itself. Either of these seem to indicate that the
universe is going to come to an end. So
when we're thinking about other claims within Christianity, like
the fact that creation will be transformed into a
new creation, or that individuals will undergo bodily resurrection,
uh Some, some problems are raised and it's the
inverse um of the previous problem in that the
A theory is unhelpful and the B theory is
helpful. So basically, whichever position the theist takes is
a problem. The reason the A theory is problematic
for bodily resurrection is that in order for there
to be bodily resurrection, you need to have a
body. But if the universe comes to an end,
then everything is destroyed, there is no body left
to be resurrected. So if there are, if there
is bodily resurrection, at the end of times, it
would have to be the creation of some new
body. And that's not what Christianity teaches. But if
you're a B theorist, even if the universe comes
to an end, at the end of the, the
last page in the book of the Block Universe,
if you like all moments, still exist. So the
body is still retrievable. Bodily resurrection is still possible
and creation still exists to be transformed. Christianity doesn't
teach about a completely spontaneous new creation and new
bodies created out of nothing. That's how this universe
came into being. But the idea within Christianity is
that this substance, the universe, the beings in it
will become transformed at the end of time. And
if you have an A theory, then it seems
like there's nothing left to be transformed. Once the
heat death or big crunch happens, there's nothing. And
so that's a, that's a big problem as well.
And that's something that scholars in science and religion,
which is the discipline that I one of the
disciplines I'm in. Uh THEY'VE given this quite a
lot of attention and some of them have said,
look, we're just gonna have to hope that God
intervenes before the end of the universe in order
to avoid some of these problems. So it's a,
it's a lively area of scholarship. But one of
the things I argue in my book is that
whether you, if you're a theist, if you're a
Christian theist, then space time, space and time itself
raises significant problems for salvation and eschatology, either there's
no body to be resurrected or sin can't be
eliminated. And so you have to really take on
both of these problems. If you want to be
Christian theist who is engaged with and interested in
the nature of time and the auto of space
time.
And in theology, are there alternatives to bodily resurrection?
I mean, could resurrection happen in a, in a
non material way, let's say.
Yeah. So it definitely could. I mean, if the
idea of an immortal soul or um, something of
that nature, but that's not what strictly, that's not
what Christianity has historically taught. We might want to,
um, as, as theologians, theologians might want to say.
Ok, well, we, that previous theology was based on
uh knowledge that wasn't informed by science. So maybe
we do need to rethink things, maybe bodies will
be created completely new out of nothing. Maybe it
will be the resurrection of the soul only. But
Christians base a lot of their understandings about what
happens eschatological on what happened to Jesus and Jesus
physical body, the same body with the scars um
from being crucified, was resurrected. And so, and that's
supposed to be a sign and a symbol of
what's to come. So you can try and get
out of these problems. But you would have to
deviate from some of the core claims of Christianity
now because I'm not a Christian. I don't see
that as a huge problem. Um But if you're
a Christian, that might be quite an unappealing uh
road to go down.
Mhm But, II, I mean, ju just to see
if I, if I understand this, why do we
need bodily resurrection for us to have uh things
like uh salvation, redemption and basically the elimination of
uh sin. Why, why do we need that? Exactly.
Well,
I don't think we do need that. I don't
think it's necessary, but it's part of the Christian
story. So if you are a Christian, you need
it because that's what it says in the Bible.
Um And if you, if you want to have
understandings of life after death that aren't Christian or
that are, that take elements of Christianity, but go
beyond it, that's totally fine. But an orthodox Christian
will say bodily resurrection is a core component of
the Christian world view because Jesus died and was
risen again. So in that sense, it's a core
Christian claim that lots of people don't want to
abandon.
And uh I, I mean, apart from resurrection, there's
also the alternative, if I understood it correctly of
a new creation, right? So what would that, sorry,
what would that entail? And in what ways would
that possibly be constrained by our understanding of space
time?
Well, I think the idea of a new creation
is best I understand it is that some this
physical universe will be transformed into something, um something
better, something that fully realizes God's purposes for creation.
And in that process, um the problems of this
creation will be overcome or redeemed. And so the
problem that I'm raising is just and that other
people have raised as well is that you need
to have a physical cosmos in order to transform
it, you need to have the bodies of individual
people. If you want to have bodily resurrection, and
you need to have this world around us if
you want to transform it. And so if the
universe does end and everything disappears out of existence,
that claim seems pretty hard to just five scientifically.
And so some Christians just don't want to engage
with the science, some of them engage with the
science, but say science has a limit and ultimately
theological knowledge and theological understanding should always take precedence
over scientific insights. And some people want to take
the science very seriously and say, look, maybe we
need to reimagine what's supposed to happen theologically because
science teaches us uh Xy and Z you know
that the universe comes to an end or something.
So, uh how do you look at the relationship
between science and theology? Because of course, we know
that there's a big schism, I guess between the
scientists and the theologians or the religious people sometimes.
So, uh and it seems to be uh theoretically
speaking and intellectually speaking, uh very hard to reconcile
them. A at least with the way we approach
things nowadays since particularly the enlightenment and so on.
So, um how do you look at the relationship
and ho how do you think we could perhaps
reconcile them and perhaps even through the kinds of
questions that you explore in your book,
this is a really, really important question. And I
think it's, it's a fascinating one because there's a,
there's an academic discipline called science and religion, of
which I'm part, which emerged halfway through the 20th
century. It was pioneered by physicists who were religious
and wanted to engage physics and Christianity primarily with
each other. And the discipline now is really broad
and really fascinating and, and a very, very lively
and dynamic area of scholarship, which I think is
gonna be one of the biggest areas of theology
moving forward. And, and so in the discipline of
science and religion, we see the two as very
easily brought into dialogue with each other, perfectly compatible
in some areas, obviously not compatible in others. But
in the wider, in wider society, the public seem
to see science and religion as completely contradictory. Now,
this is really interesting, why do scholars in the
field see it so differently to the public? And
I think part of the reason that that's the
case is because of the new atheist movement that
was prominent in the early two thousands. But also
going back to Victoria England, there are two scholars
called Draper and White who publicized and popularized this
idea that science and religion are in conflict and
are in internal perennial warfare and that they can
never be compatible. But you need to make certain
assumptions for that to be the case. And a
couple of those assumptions are you need to assume
that each discipline is fighting over the same territory.
So religion is trying to explain everything and science
is trying to explain everything. And if they say
different things, then there must be a conflict or
a clash. And the other one is that science
can be neatly defined and clearly bounded and religion
can be neatly defined and clearly bounded. And that's
not true today or historically. So what we mean
by religion has changed so much over time, we
didn't even have the term religion. 100 years ago,
we just had the Latin term religio, which meant
personal piety. It was after Europeans explored and colonized
other cultures and saw different spiritual practices that they
realized, ok, maybe there's something we need to name
here, that's, that mirrors Christianity in certain ways and
that's where the idea of religion or world religions
came about. But how religion was defined was really
deeply affected by this Eurocentric Christian centric understanding of
what religion is. So religion is belief, religion is
about belief in God. Um Religion is primarily text
based. Uh WHEREAS lots of religions are actually more
about spiritual practice, about ritual, about community. And if
you define religion in that way, it's difficult to
see how it can be in contradiction with science.
And similarly, it assumes that science has a single
perspective on important issues that can be in conflict
with religion. But we know that that's not true
because scientists disagree all the time about the correct
interpretation of the data about which theories are right.
So for example, uh drawing from my own work
on quantum mechanics, there are several empirically equivalent interpretations
of quantum mechanics, each of which paints a completely
different picture of reality. So the ever in many
worlds interpretation says that reality is comprised of uh
a multiverse where the universe branches into a multiplicity
of other universes every second. Uh And then you
have the Copenhagen interpretation which says something completely different
that just says the universe exists. Um And there's
a level of quantum randomness at its most fundamental
level. And these are two radically different physical theories
that interpret the same data and the same mathematics.
So there is no scientific perspective that can be
in conflict with religion because there is no religious
perspective either that contradicts with science. So that's, that's
why um I don't think, I think it's a
common misconception that science and religion are incompatible and
I think actually they're not, but that doesn't mean
that there's perfect synergy between them far from it.
You do see certain religious groups who are very,
very skeptical or even distrusting of science. So we
saw that recently in the COVID pandemic, um evangelicals
in the United States were very, very wary of
the vaccine and didn't want to engage with modern
science, didn't trust that the experts had their best
interests at heart. We also see it with certain
religious groups and evolution as well. Denying that evolution
is the correct explanation of the origin of humanity
and the origin of species on earth. And we
also see some scientists painting religion as backwards looking
or dogmatic or um run by corrupt authorities. And
I mean, in a sense, there are some, there
are a lot of very religious authorities out there.
So there are of course elements of tension between
science and religion and there are individual ideas that
come into conflict with each other. But the relationship
between science and religion is so much more complex
and rich and nuanced than that. So that's the
first thing I'd like to say that it's a
common misconception that science and religion are in conflict.
They don't have to be it. That idea relies
on certain assumptions that you can't justify as for
their actual relationship. I think it's really difficult to
characterize it in one neat single way because science
is so broad because religion is so broad and
because throughout history, they've had periods where science um
was largely funded by religion. So the Catholic church
funded lots of early modern science. Then you've had
periods where religion and science or religious people and
scientific minds came into conflict particularly over evolution when
it was first um proposed. So I think the
best way of characterizing the science and religion relationship
is one of complexity. This is an idea put
forward by the Historian of Science, John Hedley Brook.
So you said that science and religion are so
deeply rooted in human concerns and human endeavor that
we can't extract them from the context in which
they emerge and say science relates to religion in
this way. Instead, we have to look at this
messy complexity of religious ideas, scientific ideas, philosophical ideas,
and the individual historical actors that brought those ideas
into dialogue. So I think science and religion can
be seen as mutually enriching as uh foils to
each other um as ways to sharpen each other's
ideas. And i it's really difficult to say in
a nutshell what the relationship is. But I do
think there's a real value in interdisciplinary scholarship. Science
and religion are two of the primary ways, big
narratives, huge ideas that humans have come up with
to explain our place in the world. And so
it's really fascinating to bring those together. How has
2000 years of theological history understood the nature of
the human being and the nature of the reality
in which we live? How has science understood these
similar questions? And are there resonances between them? So
this, it's a really, really productive area of scholarship
that I would encourage anyone who's interested to delve
deeper into. There's a lot of compatibility there and
when there is friction when there is conflict, it's
really interesting to get into the nitty gritty of
that as well.
Uh But there's also a third pillar here that
is philosophy. So how would you look at uh
philosophy in relation to science and theology? I mean,
is it at the intersection of both or where
would you place it?
So philosophy is definitely its own discipline and it
predates the other two. So uh philosophy has a
really rich and informative history that has tackled pretty
much all of the big and important questions that
we have about ourselves and about the world that
we live in. So difficult questions. Like what's the
nature of the good? Uh How do we live
a good life? How do we become virtuous? How
should we live together in a society to questions
about identity? You know, what does it take for
an individual to be the same individual across time?
Um What does ultimate reality consist in? Is there
something beyond this material plane? Can everything be reduced
down to material causes a material matter? Or is
everything actually existing in the mind of an evil
demon? I mean, philosophy's philosophies come up with loads
of really interesting conversations and questions relating to reality.
So it's definitely not just at the intersection of
science and religion, but that being said, I think
it's the most useful tool when you doing science
and religion. So other other science and religion, scholars
disagree and prefer to engage pure science with pure
theology. I think philosophy is really valuable because it's
like a common language you can translate them both
into. So you can say here's the science, let's
distill that to a set of philosophical principles or
philosophical arguments, claims. And we can do the same
with religion. And then suddenly, instead of having two
things that exist on very different planes and that
it's hard to easily bring them into conversation. You
can say, well, what are the philosophical ideas that
are at stake here? How can we bring those
into dialogue? Can we find a synthesis between them
or ultimately, is there gonna be some irresolvable incompatibility
between particular ideas? And that's what I do in
my own work. I think, I think of myself
as a philosopher who does science and religion and
philosophy in my view is the perfect tool in
order to bring these fascinating disciplines into dialogue.
So I I know that you, you'll also have
a new book coming out later this year in
August. If I'm not mistaken, salvation in the block
universe. So would you like to give us perhaps
a teaser?
Yeah. So salvation in the block universe actually explores
a lot of the themes that we've been discussing
today. So my Cambridge element, God salvation and the
problem of space time is a general introduction to
these ideas. I set out uh the history of
the philosophy of time. I talk about the physics
of space time and then how God and time
interact and also how salvation can be influenced by
our understanding of space time. What salvation in the
block universe does is takes the block universe understanding
of spatial temporal reality and says, what does this
mean for personal salvation? So it's a much more
in depth exploration of the problem of salvation in
the B block universe. So I, I do talk
about some of the ideas in my but God
salvation and the problem of space this time. But
in salvation of the block universe, I'm really going
to a lot more detail and I use uh
Paul Tillich 20th century theologian as a dialogue partner
there. And Tli has this brilliant theological methodology that
he calls the method of correlation. And that's the
method that I use in my book. So the
method of correlation says that theology only works when
it's in dialogue with culture. So what theologians need
to do is look at culture, look at the
contemporary culture that they're in and say what are
the important questions that are arising out of this
culture ferilli, these were existential questions. And so his
theology is very deeply informed by existentialism. But for
me, I was looking um at at philosophy particularly
and seeing that questions about time, temporal reality and
space time are some of the pressing conceptual questions
that we are dealing with. And so I begin
with the physics and philosophy of space time and
the block univer. And then I go on to
talk about the implications for salvation. So anyone who's
interested in the book that we've been discussing today
will hopefully find the book that I'm releasing in
August. Similarly interesting. It goes, it's a deeper dive
into some of these questions.
So, and of course, I'm leaving a link to
the book we've been discussing today God salvation and
the problem of space time in the description of
the interview. And would you also like to tell
people where they can find you and the rest
of your work on the internet?
Yeah, that's right. So, um I have a Twitter,
it's E Qureshi Hurst and I tweet about all
things science, philosophy, theology, and also a bit about
my life as well. Um I have a Google
Scholar page where you can find all of my
papers. So you just type in my name, Emily
Qureshi Hurson to Google my Google scholar page will
be there. Uh Quite a few of my papers
are open access so they can be read by
anybody. And um yeah, I, I hope that people
will be interested in these ideas and explore them
further.
Great. So Doctor Kihi Hurst, thank you so much
for taking the time to come on the show
again and it was really a pleasure to talk
with you.
Thank you so much for inviting me. Uh It's
been, it's been really great. Thanks so much.
Hi guys. Thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it.
Leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by N Lights Learning
and development then differently check the website at N
lights.com and also please consider supporting the show on
Patreon or paypal. I would also like to give
a huge thank you to my main patrons and
paypal supporters, Perego Larson, Jerry Muller and Frederick Suno
Bernard Seche O of Alex Adam Castle Matthew Whitting
B are no wolf, Tim Ho Erica LJ Conners,
Philip Forrest Connelly. Then the Met Robert Wine in
NAI Z Mar Nevs calling in Hobel, Governor Mikel
Stormer Samuel Andre Francis for Agns Ferger Ken Hall,
her ma J and Lain Jung Y and the
Samuel K Hes Mark Smith J. Tom Hummel S
friends, David Sloan Wilson, Ya Des Roman Roach Diego,
Jan Punter, Romani Charlotte Bli Nicole Barba, Adam Hunt
Pavlo Stassi na me, Gary G Alman, Samo, Zal
Ari and YPJ Barboza Julian Price Edward Hall, Eden
Broner Douglas Fry Franca Gilon Cortez or. Solis Scott
Zachary ftdw Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Giorgio, Luke
Loki, Georgio Theophano, Chris Williams and Peter Wo David
Williams, the Ausa Anton Erickson Charles Murray, Alex Shaw,
Marie Martinez, Coralie Chevalier, Bangalore Larry Dey junior, Old
Ebon Starry Michael Bailey then spur by Robert Grassy
Zorn, Jeff mcmahon, Jake Zul Barnabas Radick Mark Temple,
Thomas Dvor Luke Neeson, Chris Tory Kimberley Johnson, Benjamin
Gilbert Jessica Week in the B brand Nicholas Carlson
Ismael Bensley Man George Katis Valentine Steinman, Perlis Kate
Van Goler, Alexander Abert Liam Dan Biar Masoud Ali
Mohammadi Perpendicular Jer Urla. Good enough Gregory Hastings. David
Pins of Sean Nelson, Mike Levin and Jos Net.
A special thanks to my producers is our web,
Jim Frank Lucani. Tom Vig and Bernard N Cortes
Dixon, Bendik Muller Thomas Trumble, Catherine and Patrick Tobin,
John Carl, Negro, Nick Ortiz and Nick Golden. And
to my executive producers, Matthew Lavender, Sergi, Adrian Bogdan
Knit and Rosie. Thank you for all.